All right. So what I
want to do now is talk
about the Evolution of
Peer to Peer Lending,
from its early days back in 2006,
to what we see now,
and how it's really
a business plan that's
really pivoted from
one thing to another which is why
as I mentioned,
the name is changing.
Okay. So the original idea
was peer-to-peer lending, right.
You have some people
who have money that
they want to just put
to work for a bit,
and some people who are in
a situation where
they need to borrow,
let them find each other,
let them discover the terms
on which each side is happy,
on the transaction
and the platform,
the Internet platform
is just going
to help them make
this happen, right.
The big flat forms in those days
are the same as today.
The lenders to look for
here if you want to
browse the Internet
would be Lending Club,
and Prosper Marketplace.
I mean there are
plenty of others.
I don't mean to say
there are some how
better than others,
but they've been there
since the beginning,
and they have pivoted
along with the rest
of this industry towards
marketplace lending.
Okay. So you were
there to facilitate
the discovery of
the borrowers and
lenders with this sort of
idea was there all retail.
There's just all, just people
consumers living their lives,
who either have money to put to
work or they need
some money right now.
Okay. So how would this work?
Well, you have borrowers,
the borrowers if you wanted
to borrow in this marketplace,
you'd have to provide some
financial information,
some standardized
financial information
that they would need from you.
So you would provide that,
for people to look at.
You could post a picture,
and some people did of yourself,
maybe you and your family.
You would say well, here's
how much I want to borrow,
and here is the most
I'm willing to pay.
The term alone will
be pretty much fixed.
It would just be a
mere on a three-year
loan or five -year loan.
So that would be pretty
much standardized.
Why would you go to this market?
Well, then and now
the main reason people go to
borrow in this market is
their credit card debt.
All right. They've run up
a balance on their cards.
They're paying
that big rate that,
you'd see in the fine print,
on your credit card statement,
to pay in that big rate,
and they want to
refinance into something
more manageable.
Okay. This is by 80 percent
of the borrowers.
There some other reasons,
but that's the big one.
Okay. They could get
the home equity line.
They could go that route.
Maybe some of them already have,
and of course maybe
the others are thinking well,
I don't want to risk
my house like that.
I don't want to ramp up the risk
of foreclosure
especially after we've
seen that with our own eyes so
much 10 years ago. So okay.
So they're trying to meet up
each other and find the rate at
which they're
willing to transact.
Let me just sketch just
for a moment here,
how as an economist would look
at this problem of trying
to find the rate at
which we could transact.
There's a fundamental
problem that
lending institutions everywhere
encounter every day,
and to an economist,
the term of art for
this problem is
what they call credit rationing.
The credit rationing.
Let me give you
just without
any numbers or figures,
just how to think about this
problem of credit rationing,
and how it can be a barrier
to finalizing transaction
on this marketplace.
So here's the basic idea.
Let's say we're thinking
you maybe you're
going to loan to me.
Okay. Maybe you're
But the problem that
you're going to encounter,
is that we both know that,
I know things about my risk
that you don't know.
All right. I know
things about my job,
my health, my plans,
all sorts of other things, my
investments, whatever it is,
I know things about my risk that
would be difficult or maybe even
impossible for you to
figure out for yourself.
Okay. So the issue is that,
if I let's say,
I put a high probability on
the outcome where I go bust.
All right. That I just
I can't pay it back,
I privately know that
that's a high probability.
You know it's possible right,
but I happen to
know that actually I put
high probability on that.
Now, let's say you offer me,
offer to loan to me at
a high interest rate.
Well, if I look at that loan
at a high interest rate,
I might look at that and
say, well, you know what,
it's on paper it's
a high interest rate,
but in fact if I put
a high probability on
not repaying the loan,
then it doesn't really
seem like such a
high interest rate to me because
I put a big probability on
paying you back zero, right.
Or something small right.
So a high interest
rate to me to someone
who privately knows
his risk is high,
might not seem so big,
might not seem so onerous to me,
because I see that big chance
of not paying you back.
Whereas, someone who views,
who privately knows
that he's low-risk,
then puts a very high chance
on repaying the loan.
So if it's a high
interest rate loan,
that person looks at
is very expensive that
I expect to repay this loan,
and paying it back
whatever, 15-20 percent,
whatever it is you said,
to me that's expensive, right.
So the issue is
that, if you loan,
if you offer to loan to me
at a low interest rate,
then I would accept that
whether I'm low risk
or high risk.
Okay. But the higher the
interest rate that you offer,
the more likely it
is that the guy who
privately knows he's low-risk
is going to drop out
and say, forget it.
But the guy who privately
knows that he's
high risk is just still
going to accept it.
As you increase the interest
rate that you offer,
the average risk of the person
who would accept
that offer, is going up.
Okay. So whereas you might
think that if we're trying
to find a rate to transact,
there's got to be some,
there's got to be some rate
that at which we can agree.
The problem is that,
you might only be willing to
go so far with the interest rate
that you offer because you know
that if you go above that rate,
then the effect of going
above that rate on
the expected risk of
the person who would
accept that rate,
is just too high.
So you're willing
to go so far but
not above that in the rate
that you'll offer me,
and that's why people talk about
credit rationing because normally
in any market you think well,
if there is excess demand to
buy something at some price,
then the price is going to go
up to make supply equal demand.
But in the lending market,
if there's excess demand
to lend at this rate,
that doesn't mean that
the price is going to change.
There's only so much.
People are only going to
raise the rates so much.
They're not going to go
higher than that because of
this negative effect of the rate
that you offer on
the risk of the kind of
person who would accept it.
So you get that kind of
problem playing out
in this market,
and it makes it hard to
transact efficiently.
But people tried, that's
how this market started.
So in the original days,
if I want to borrow, I'd say,
"I want to borrow this much
at a rate no higher than this."
Then the lenders
would say, " Well,
I'm willing to loan whatever
each one myself
along a 100 bucks,
200 bucks, whatever and at
a rate no lower than this."
So a bunch of people
making bids to lend
and then you have
the borrower saying,
"How much he wants to borrow?"
If everyone who wants
to loan adds up to
the amount that the
person wants to
borrow, then that's it.
You've got a transaction
and they set
the interest rate at
the market clearing rate,
and they say, "That's it, okay.
You guys have a loan."
So the lender supply the cash,
the borrower gets the cash,
and then the idea is to borrow,
then ultimately
pays back the loan,
and this is all intermediated
by the platform.
Okay. So that's how it started,
and there was some of
this in a small-scale.
Of course, it didn't help very
much that this started in 2006,
and then very soon, well,
we were in the recession
which naturally
didn't help the
repayment capability
of the people who borrowed.
So what happened over
the next few years is that
the lending platform
got more and more
involved in the decisions.
So they would start
the lending platform would make
its own credit risk
evaluation and then set
a floor on the interest rate
for this particular borrower.
After that, then
the lending platform would
start not to putting a floor
on it but just say, "Okay,
this guy we've looked
at the credit,
we've looked at the financials
for this person,
the interest rate is going to be
10 percent or 12 percent
or eight percent."
Whatever it is, they
would set the rate.
Then as an investor,
you're not really bidding
anyway, you just say,
"Okay, I'll take some
of that or I won't.
I'll buy a hundred bucks
of that loan or I won't."
Then over the years,
the platform has gotten
more involved in setting
the terms of the transaction,
and the role of the investors,
the lenders has gotten
more and more passive.
Just, okay yeah,
it can't begin on
that or no leave me out.
So that's has evolved over time,
whereas when you get
to today, by now,
about 95 percent of all
lending on this platform is
by not retail investors,
but just institutional
investors who
just post a bunch of
capital, they say, "Okay.
Prosper or Lending Club.
We want this 10 million
bucks to just go
to borrowers who show
up on your platform
and will just automatically buy
whatever loans you approve
within this or that
risk category."
The platforms themselves have
greatly ramped up
their ability to
do this risk evaluation with
this big data machine
learning approach,
so they've got all this data now.
These days if you want to
borrow on Lending club,
you supply all sorts of
financial information.
They can browse all around
your bank account and
all sorts of other things,
and they've got
these algorithms they've
developed for looking around
your bank account and
your other financials,
and coming up with a risk score.
They've gotten very good at this.
One thing I've noticed is
that back in the early days
you might think,
"Well, we don't need
the lending platform to
give us a risk score.
We already have what's
called the FICO score,
everyone has a FICO score."
The FICO score is a score
developed by
the Fair Isaac Company,
and FICO scores are everywhere.
You've probably seen
your FICO score,
you've used your FICO score when
you bought a house or a car.
So we have FICO scores,
why don't they just
use the FICO score?
Well, they can do much
better than the FICO score.
Over the years, the correlation
between the score
that the lending
platforms come up
with in the FICO score
has just gone down,
and the lenders credit scores
is actually now do a lot
better in this context of
predicting the outcome
of these loans.
If you talk to these lenders in
this peer-to-peer or
marketplace lending space,
and you ask them, what's
the social benefit of
what you guys are doing?
Well, they'll have
various things they would
bring up but one thing
that comes up a lot
is what they referred to as
the invisible prime borrower.
What they mean by that,
let me show you some graphs
here and I'll walk
you through them.
What they mean by
invisible prime is that,
if you look at all the people
who are currently
rated subprime due
to their FICOs,
and there's different cut-offs,
but one popular cutoff
when you think
about is your FICO
score to low the 680.
If your FICO score is below
680 many people would say,
"Well, you're a
subprime borrower."
FICO score which
is calculated from
your credit report is below
680, you're subprime.
What the people at
the Lending Club and
Prosper and so on will
say, "Well, okay.
We can look at that population
of people below 680,
and we can find good credits.
We can find people who really are
prime even though their
credit score says otherwise,
and we're willing to loan
to them at rates that
reflect our belief that
they really are prime."
So here is a couple of graphs.
Here, I got off of a paper
written by some economists at
the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia.
They got the data
from Lending Club.
If you look at these graphs here,
let's look at
the one on the left.
This is showing you,
what they're saying
here is, look,
looking just at those people
with FICOs below 680.
When we look at
that group of people and
we put them into risk categories
based on our algorithm,
from A risks which are
the best risks to the G risks
which are the worst risks.
Look at the A risks,
and remember,
this is only from those people
who have subprime FICOs,
those people we do find
these A risks are in that
population and their chance of
default over the course of
the two years is
just five percent, right?
Five percent. Well, that's
a very low chances of default,
and that's a prime borrower.
We found that borrower in
everyone else we call subprime.
Of course, we find
some very high risks
in that category too
looking out at the G risks,
they have a chance of
default over 35 percent,
that's very high, right?
So yes, there are
high risks there,
but look, we can
find the low risks.
Look at the graph on
the right-hand side.
Here, what they're doing is
they are within each of
their risk categories,
or A through G, that's Lending
Club's risk categories.
Within each of them,
they're showing you
the performance of those accounts
that they put in those A
through G buckets,
broken out by what
was their FICO score.
So if you look on the very left,
the borrowers above A,
this is showing you that
when they call you an A risk
that you have
a low probability default
whether your FICO was below 680,
which is the blue bars, or above
750 which is the purple bars.
Yes, the people with
the worst FICOs are in fact
doing a little worse
expose but still
all of them are doing
well as far as the risk
of the mortgage.
So it's basically
showing you that as you
sort people by our credit risks,
we are capturing
the lion's share of
the actual variation in how risky
people really are
in the FICO score.
On top of that, this isn't
telling you very much.
So they've developed
an algorithm.
Of course, they're
looking at things
your FICO score can't look at,
your FICO score is calculated
off your credit report.
They are calculating this off
of all sorts of stuff that
the FICO score cannot
be calculated off of.
Your bank account statement
isn't on your credit report.
All sorts of things that they can
see are not on
your credit report.
So this big data
coming through for them
allowing them to make
credit decisions which are
far more informed. All right.
So that's the credit decision
and the source of the
funds as they say
institutional investors just post
cash and that cash is what's
used to fund the loans.
You also have loans
that are securitized,
which means that you
have a big bundle of
Lending Club or
Prosper loans which
are all pooled together,
and then they issue securities
backed by that pool of loans.
Just because we had all sorts of
securitization going into
the financial crisis,
didn't always necessarily
work out that well.
But that can be
a great source of funds,
is a way that institutional
investors can buy
these Prosper loan backed bonds
and invest in those.
Now, one thing people often say
about this market and
it's true is that,
this market in
this current business model
hasn't been tested
by a big downturn.
So we'll see what
happens when the economy
turns out to the performance
of these loans.
It's going to be a test,
and maybe they pass that test,
maybe they don't,
that's yet to be seen.
So to summarize we have
so far these
Peer-to-Peer platforms,
they're offering
an alternative to consumers.
An alternative way to
refinance out of
your credit card debt.
You already had helocks
that can give you a nice rate
but there's a risk to that.
You can go to this
other platform instead,
maybe can borrow
at a better rate.
The platforms have
very accurate credit
scoring algorithms
that can find that
invisible prime borrower,
and bring to that person
the kind of rate that
they in some sense earned with
their management or finances that
the platform can see with all
the browsing around that they do.
This really isn't a retail
investment play anymore.
That's really not
the way this works.
It's not peers loaning
peers anymore.
It's big institutions posting
the cash that is going to
be invested based on these
very sophisticated algorithms.
Okay? So that's
the peer-to-peer lending,
and the next thing we're talking
about in the next module
is going to be the student loans.